Jackie Andrade published a study in 2010 that examined the effects of doodling on recall ability. In her study,
she showed that, compared to students who did not doodle, students who doodled while listening to a twominute audio recording were able to recall significantly more information that they were told to attend to, as well
as information that they were told they did not have to attend to. The researcher attributed this effect to a
reduction in daydreaming that occurred in those who were doodling. This conclusion is supported by several
studies showing that performance on information processing and/or recall tasks (e.g., memory tasks, listening
to a lecture or video) can be increased when one engages in low attention-demanding tasks simultaneously,
such as doodling, in situations where the learner experiences boredom (Roche et al., 2007; Smallwood,
O’Connor, Sudbery, & Obonsawin, 2007). This occurs because doodling maintains arousal while consuming a
limited amount of available cognitive resources compared to daydreaming, which consumes a high amount of
cognitive resources (Teasdale, Proctor, Lloyd, & Baddeley, 1993). There were, as the researcher mentions in
the study, a few limitations in her study, as well as opportunities to extend her findings, and this is the purpose
of the current research study.
The main limitation of the Andrade (2010) study was the way that participants doodled. Participants were given
sheets of paper with objects to shade in (squares and circles) while they listened to the audio recording.
Although this is certainly a form of doodling, this method certainly lacks ecological validity. It is reasonable to
assume that those who doodle, whether students in class or workers in a business meeting, would be engaged
in more of a freestyle form of doodling. It is also reasonable to assume that those who doodle would exert
various amounts of their attention and other cognitive resources into their doodling activities. For example, a
detailed drawing of another classmate or person would most likely require more cognitive resources than
doodling random shapes or squiggly lines, and thus it is possible that the type of doodling may moderate the
relationship between doodling and increased recall ability.
An additional limitation of Andrade’s (2010) study, which the author mentioned is the article, is that there were
no measures of daydreaming that could confirm the hypothesis that students who doodled engaged in
daydreaming less than students who listened and took notes. The present study was designed to address
some of the limitations of the existing work on doodling. First, we focused on whether different types of doodling
would yield the same effect on recall ability. Our second question centered on a more practical issue: How does
doodling compare to other proven tools such as note-taking? In Andrade’s study, participants in the “control”
group took notes but only on part of the information on which they were to be assessed. Finally, we sought to
compare different types of doodling to note-taking.
